Okay so in this lecture we're going to focus on a black and white outline outlines are important they
determine what the overall shape of whatever your drawing is.
And we're going to use something called the pencil tool because it allows us to be precise either having
a complete black or a complete white pixel and nothing in between.
Like some of the other tools we'll be doing.
Okay so let's go ahead and open up guimpe.
So we've got our standard interface we're comfortable with that now.
However we haven't laid a pixel down on a virtual sheet yet so let's go ahead and do that.
First of all we of course we do need to create a new image.
And as you've probably guessed by now it's under file and new.
Now when you create a new image it will default to 640 by 400.
And this default itself can be changed in user preferences that we've had a brief look at before.
Now in this particular case we're going to zoom right in to 8 and 8.
So I'd like you to make sure that the width and the height are both eight.
You don't need to do anything else.
Leave this as P. X..
There are lots of other things you can pick.
But we want pixels which is P X..
Once we've done that we can go ahead and click okay.
Now you're going to struggle to actually see what's going on at the moment.
So we are going to need to zoom in and manage our zoom level as we're working as well.
So how do we go about doing that.
Well there are a couple of ways.
Obs rooming in at the very bottom of the main window there is a drop down or in this case drop up because
it's at the bottom that gives you various types of different zoom levels and if we select 800 we can
see that the area we're working on is still quite small.
How do we get even closer.
Well we can do that by going to view and we can see here there are many many options that we can pick
from and we can zoom in even further if we go to the Zune menu here we can see we can revert the Zune
we can zoom in using the plus key zoom in out using the minus key we can fit the image in the window.
And that is what I'm going to be using here.
You can also see there are some other shortcuts one through five.
So if we go ahead and hit five that's still not really big enough.
It's gone to twice the size it was before.
We can use the plus keys to zoom in or as we saw a moment ago there's some shortcut keys which I will
be using in the moment of a to the right menu and that is shift control in J.
Now do check on your system that might be slightly different.
It might be Command shift and J on a Mac for instance.
So if I go control shift and Jay is going to fill the screen with my image.
In this case.
Now let's get to laying down some pixels.
So our first thing to do is pick a tool and for that we're going to need to use the tool box.
Now the tool box is this area on the top left.
That's got lots of different options in it ranging from selection tools to colour swatches to indeed
a magnifying glass and we can see there a zoom tool so we can adjust the zoom level with the Z key as
well as a shortcut key there.
So if you hover over it will tell you what all of these tools are.
Now we need a tool let's call the pencil.
So we go ahead and find that yours might be laid out slightly differently or indeed just because you've
got a different sort of zoom in level or window structure than myself.
So we need this one here.
The pencil tool.
And if we hover over at weaknesses of the pencil tool it's a hard edge and I'd show you what that means
in a moment.
And there's a shortcut key which is n so you can use that to work with.
Now if you just go ahead and select that you will notice that your icon itself on the on the cursor
now has a little pencil next to it which is incredibly useful because if you've selected some other
tool perhaps the zoomed tool you'll see that it changes to a magnifying glass or a looking glass.
Let's go back.
I'm going to use the shortcut key here and I'll switch back to the pencil and we can see that the cursor
has also updated.
Now one of the things you'll discover the moment you start using it is that if you click once the whole
thing goes black.
That doesn't give you much control.
How do we have a bit more fine control.
Well we need to alter the tools options and we're going to do that now.
So by going to tool options underneath you can see a series of options for that particular tool that
you've selected.
And if we go ahead.
So it's another one I'm going to go back to the zoom you can see that it changes the options underneath
back to the pencil.
And we've got another series of options and the one that we really care about for the moment is the
size option at the moment it's set to 20.
And that means how many pixels wide it actually is.
So I'm going to zoom out slightly longer and use the minus key on my keyboard and you can see there's
this outline in dashes that that itself is 20 pixels wide by 20 pixels tool.
That's why whenever we click at the moment it fills the entire image because our image is only eight
by eight so we can control this by even clicking and dragging or indeed typing in a.
No.
So in this case I'm going to type in the number one and once I've typed in the number one you can see
that that outlined area the dashed area has turned to one individual Square.
And in fact you can see there at 8 across and that is incredibly useful because now we've got precision
control over our image.
And I'm going to zoom back in again use and control shift and Jay rather than the menu or anything else.
So we've already had a brief look at the pencil at all as in we've selected it or you change the size.
But what does it actually mean.
Well in this particular case it means that it's hard edged and we can see that this outline is snapping
to individual pixels.
The other ones if we pick another tool that's capable of laying down colour like the paint brush you
short kaise pay we go ahead and select that we can see that it's me.
It's not as granular it is actually quite smooth.
And also when you start laying down colour in a moment or in this case black and white you'll see that
it is pixel by pixel which is why we're going to use the pencil tool and if we have a look when we hover
over the pencil tool we see it says hard edge painting and that means that when we lay down a pixel
it does not affect the pixels next to it.
So at the moment our entire image is black.
And that's no good.
We need it to be white and we can select the white by simply going back over to our tool box and you'll
see a little black and white square and next to it will be a double headed arrow.
If you click on that it will switch between the background and foreground colours which in this instance
are black and white by default.
Now if we change it so white is the one on top.
We can now start laying down some white individual pixels.
Now just to highlight what would happen if you use the paint brush tool instead to do exactly the same
thing.
You'll notice that it changes more than one pixel at once and produces some greys.
And we don't want that we want to use just monochrome at the moment one colour or another.
Or in this case black or white.
So I've gone in and I'm literally using my left mouse button there clicking and filling all the pixels
in black again.
Now you can switch quickly between these two using the x key.
If I go ahead and hit it now we can see that they're switching backwards and forwards so I can lay down
white white white white.
And if I've made a mistake I can hit the x key and it goes back and I can hit it again.
And there we go.
I can start to make a chessboard perhaps.
And of course as you're laying down pixels like this it starts to become obvious that you're going to
make mistakes at a time but also that you don't have much room to move in when we've restricted you
to something like this.
And that is good because that really gets the creative juices flowing.
Now say we've created a chessboard like this I'd like you to pay attention to the top left not right
in the corner but we can see the top left of the image window itself.
There is a smaller thumbnail of this picture that we've been working on and that's useful that gives
you an idea of what it is actually looking like because when you've zoomed into this level it can be
a bit disorientating as to how the image is looking overall.
And so you can quickly glance up at this tab and there you can see your small icon coming together your
symbol that you're making.
Now of course at some point you will want to save your work.
So let's go ahead and do that now.
And if you're no stranger to a computer you will realize it's under the File menu and it will have its
various shortcuts.
Control shift in S will do save as we can save a copy to make a duplicate and again there are tool tips
every time you hover over.
And in this case I just want to save the image.
So when you go ahead and click save it will not use the standard layout that you're used to.
It has its own layout.
In this case I'm on Windows and this isn't Windows Explorer.
It's a variation upon.
Now of course you want to make yourself a project folder.
I've already got one so I'm going to go to that.
And in this case I'm going to title this chequers or something along those lines because that's what
I produce and I'm going to go ahead and click save.
Now if I need to open that back up at any time I can go ahead and double click that on my file system.
Or of course and go file open and it will remember where I've been working.
We can see chequers just here X C F and XY F is a gimp file.
It's not GNP or something along those lines it's actually scaf.
Now the reason to save it as a proprietary file like this and not in something like a J.
Edgar appear in G is the FCF will retain all of the settings that you've made in GIMP.
Whereas if you go ahead and save it as a j peg or save it as a any other type of file that isn't fully
guimpe compatible you start to throw away information.
So an X C.F. is a Gift far.
Go ahead and open that we've actually got two images the same open at the same time and we can see at
the top there are tabs that we can switch between them both the same murena in this case.
So we're going to have a bit of a race on which one is the updated one if we're not careful.
However we see when we open it it's tiny again so we can use control shift n.j. to zoom back in and
check it out.
Excellent.
So that's got a good grasp of the pencil tool and working in black and white.
And of course that leads us nicely up to our challenge and your challenge is going to be to create an
8 by 8 image.
Use only the pencil tool and use only black and white with these constraints.
We're going to be able to increase our creativity because you're going to have to think carefully about
each pixel you're laying on the page.
And I'd like to try drawing a smiling face.
So go ahead.
Pulls a video now and give that a go.
Okay guys welcome back.
Let's go ahead and try drawing a smiley face.
Okay so we left off here before with some chequers on the screen.
I'm going to go up to file new and create a new image.
Now it's remembered what I had before eight by eight signed just going to go ahead and click okay.
Don't need to type anything in there.
And it does zoom in on I'm going to use those shortcut keys control shift in Jay to zoom right in.
I can see we've got pixels.
Have I got the pencil tool selected.
Yes I have.
And black is the foreground colour.
That's going to be the one that I'm going to be painting with.
Now I have obviously practiced this before I am going to go ahead and just lay down some pixels to try
and make a circle to begin with.
So it's go ahead let's move across here.
So I think that's coming across as a circle.
And remember any time and this is very fortunate it's more of a happy accident than anything else.
We have a look along the very top of the picture that we're creating here.
We see a couple of thumbnails.
And so we can have a good idea of what this thumbnails going to look like what this image is going to
look like even though we're quite zoomed in at the moment.
So what have we got left to do.
Well it's a face that's going to have a couple of eyes and it's smiling so let's go ahead and does that
look at all good question.
I think that's a little.
I'm going to hit X to switch the foreground and background colours and basically lay down white on top
of the black again.
Now I'm going to shift that smile up a little and have another look.
Yes.
Brilliant.
Like in how that's looking somebody ahead.
Go file save.
Make sure you save in an appropriate location.
Going to have to find my location again.
I'll pop it in a folder called Black and White called smile.
And then I save that.
And there we go.
That's all saved and we can see at the very top of my window we can see it says smile.
Scaf rather than untitled.
Brilliant.
How did you guys get on.
I hope you found this relatively straightforward to do.
We're going to up the ante soon.
But first let's draw a few more things and we will do that now over in the next lecture.